i think you can see that i'm no smarter
than anybody else in this room
i just use certain little basic tools to
be successful every day
take the word no out of your vocabulary
worry about your customer no spare
customers use the 95 5 rule separate
yourself from everybody else be the bull
at whatever you do and i don't care if
you're in the mail room or if you're the
person behind that camera that i'm going
to be better than anybody else with that
camera and i'm going to be the best male
carrier and the person who comes up and
is the most organized and does it the
most professional way you can be the
bull at any position you're doing and
it's just telling yourself i'm going to
do this better than anybody else
[Music]
hey everyone welcome to impact theory
today's guest is an extraordinary
entrepreneur who took himself from the
owner of a single restaurant in kd texas
to the world's richest restaurant tour
with 600 restaurants in 36 states spread
across more than 15 countries today his
business empire encompasses not only
such landmark restaurants as mastro
steakhouse rainforest cafe morton's dos
caminos and bubba gump shrimp company
but also a wide variety of other
industries including numerous hotels
casinos aquariums and even the houston
rockets mba franchise he stands as one
of the largest employers in the nation
with a staggering 60 000 employees and
his companies collectively serve over
150 million customers annually his
outsized success places him at 153 on
the forbes 400 list of the wealthiest
americans and he's received countless
awards for his endeavors including
entrepreneur of the year award from
ernst young and being inducted into the
texas business hall of fame as the
second youngest inductee ever he is also
an incredibly active philanthropist who
currently serves as chairman of the
board for the houston police foundation
the houston's children charity and the
texas heart institute additionally he is
the longest-running chairman of the
board of regents for the university of
houston so please help me in welcoming
the bullish and charismatic star of
cnbc's billion-dollar buyer the author
of shut up and listen tillman fertitta
[Applause]
good welcome glad to be here tom man it
is good to have you dude your story is
pure insanity what you have accomplished
and built essentially from scratch is
bordering on unparalleled it's it's
really insane and i love some of the
notions that you have that i think have
helped you really build that
give me
some background on keep punching
you know it's it's funny and uh i guess
when i
first was really going in the 80s
uh you hit that horrible recession and
people talk about how did banks get so
big because the government took a few of
the big banks and said you're going to
take the good assets and we're going to
take all the bad assets and that's why
you have banks that are too big to fail
today because they're roll ups of bank
after bank
and in the late 80s were tough and i was
getting going and and and you just
realized when other people were filing
bankruptcy you just got to keep punching
and punching and punching and and people
don't realize how much
you can take and and if you just keep
punching and find a way to get out of
the mess and you know what's funny this
is a great story and i talk about it in
the book
i was doing business with like nine or
ten banks in in the late 80s in texas
and it was really getting tough and to
make payments or whatever starting to
default on some by a few days
every single bank that i did business
with failed before i did
is that not a crazy story and i know
that's hard to believe but the fdic
would come in every tuesday into houston
in in the late 80s and closed down four
or five or six banks so over about a
over about a six month period every
single bank failed that i did business
with and you had you would call and say
so what do i do with these payments and
there was such a bureaucracy i truly got
a three four year reprieve
and and then in
1990 i remember somebody calling my
office and saying mr fertitta we have
these uh notes of yours we would like
you to come in and talk to us but in
that time
i was able to go and and keep building
my company and was able to pay him a
hundred percent
that no interest though yeah that that's
a a nice touch now so in this notion of
making sure that you keep punching and
knowing how much of a shot you can take
how do you
stay focused when you're getting punched
weather that storm and have the clarity
to move forward well you just gotta keep
punching and just take care of your
business and you just realize until they
come and shut you down or lock the doors
or you can't get product or whatever
until you can't make a payroll you'd be
surprised what you can take though and
and you just keep punching and punching
and believe it or not times you know get
good and it goes back to what i once
again preach when times are really bad
we forget they're ever going to be good
again and when times are really good we
forget they're going to be bad again and
we need to always remember that so the
paddle doesn't get you
yeah tell people your your concept of
the paddle well there's a paddle for
everybody's ass we all know that and uh
every day you just get up and i don't
fear anything but i worry about
everything and the day you stop worrying
in good times
the paddle will get you behind and and
and so as great as things are in life
i know you're only a few steps or a few
incidents away
from something bad happening you can
never forget it did you have fear as a
kid and you just got into enough
business scuffles that you figured your
way through things or have you always
been fearless i'm pretty fearless but i
do worry about everything but
you know once again you know the book
and this is why harper's asked me to
write the book because of all my
tillmanisms you got to know what you
know and what you don't know
and and i knew that i understood
business now don't ask me to you know go
win an emmy i took guitar lessons for
four years and i still struggle playing
a guitar i can't draw a stick person
very good but i knew that i understood
business so i i know what i know and i
know how to do due diligence on a deal i
don't worry about making a bad deal
because i feel like
that's what i know so
no fear when it comes to that and how
much of that is instinctive and how much
of that have you had to teach yourself
i think i definitely got the dna gene
and understood business but at the same
time i've been a sponge and i'll look
and watch everything and pay attention
and every day i get up i look for
mistakes and uh what i can learn that
day you don't ever think that you know
it all because you don't and so every
day still a learning process and and you
just you can't ever get caught up with
who you are because you're worth a few
billion dollars and and you have an
extremely large company and because like
i said the day i i don't look in the
back of my head that paddle is going to
get my ass my father-in-law is um a very
successful self-made man came from a
tiny ass village in cyprus which i
hadn't even heard of until i met his
daughter
and
he gave me i think the best piece of
business advice i've ever gotten and i
still use it to this day which is to
know more about any situation than
anybody else in the room
and that has served me really well
i'm guessing given your reputation and
how people say you can spot a light bulb
out at 40 000 feet and all the things
that people say about you that
you tend to know more about any deal
anything going on in your company than
anybody else i want to know how how do
you
master it to that level well i mean i i
can't get into some details that people
know that i don't know but but if you
walk into my office for a meeting i
don't care what department you're in i
will pick apart whatever you have and
and you better know your numbers when
you walk in there with a spreadsheet or
you better you have your ads right if
you're the marketing person walking in
but you also
you you know you know if people know
what they're doing and and uh but it's
my job to make sure and bring everybody
up to another level and i think that's
probably one of the greatest compliments
i've ever gotten is that i'll take
somebody good and make them better is
that is that a conscious process for you
like what are you doing is it just
kicking people in the ass inspiring them
by example all the above i think i do
you always know where you stand with me
uh i have
all my top vps probably have been with
me an average of 25 years my two
assistants uh have been with me 27 and
26 years uh and everybody will tell you
that is the hardest son of a in
the world to work for but i would never
work for anybody else what would you
have to see in them to think it's worth
the risk
i think one of the best things that i
ever did was i will i will look at
somebody's resume and i can say you know
what
you've never been with the right company
and that's why you haven't excelled and
and you are that's why you're in here
today and so many people choose the
wrong company to go to work for and i
look at people all the time and i look
at your resume and say why did you go to
work for this company i knew they were
screwed up when you went to work for
them okay and so some people just are
not good at choosing the right company
and also the person interviewing them
makes promises that never happen
and i think that's one of the biggest
mistakes that people make is choosing
the wrong company to go to work for
curiosity what to make something the
wrong company to go to work for is it
different by person or are there just
certain things in a company people
should look out for well do they really
have good liquidity are they going to be
in business are they an acquisition
target where all of a sudden that they
are and you're going to get bought and
probably laid off
uh
you know everything is is uh
are they do they have a product that is
going to be around for a long time so
everything from liquidity to product
acquisition target growth where are you
going to go
everybody should always ask themselves
if they want to grow and they just don't
want to just
whatever is say where can i be in five
years if i can't be at this position in
five years then this isn't a good career
path for me i think everything is career
path
i'd love to talk about that so your
career path is crazy
and
awe inspiring so how much of that was
mapped out like when you had that single
restaurant in texas how big were you
dreaming were you already thinking
aquariums like
how much of this is you're just going
and you're taking a deal as it comes how
much of it is you discovered as you went
let's do it another way let's go back to
10 years old i walked around with my my
business my briefcase
full of business there was no business
in it but i wanted to be a business guy
but you really didn't know what it was
by junior high i was buying candy and
reselling it at school by high school i
was already trading on the stock market
so let's take these one at a time so the
candy sales
who gave you that idea did you just
understand oh if i can buy it for less
and i sell it then i can make money
that's just hey doing whatever it took
to make money i always wanted to make
money always had money even when i was a
kid because i always worked whatever job
i could find whether it was
mowing somebody's yard or washing cars
or selling lemonade to the construction
workers
it was just always about making money
what made you good at selling that is a
very particular skill you know i
i'm
even today
it's it's all about somebody said why
are you so successful because i sell and
even when you go out and you raise
billions of dollars in debt and you're
meeting with debt holders you're still
selling yourself that's what it's all
about you're not just selling the deal
when i was public for 18 years okay and
you're selling equity uh i did five
follow-on offerings the most a
restaurant company ever did when i was
public and uh and and you are selling
yourself and and and you know you know
your numbers you know your business and
you make yourself that you know more
than everybody else even if you don't
so
to dig beyond the sort of mythology of
just the kid carrying the briefcase and
oh this comes naturally at some point
this becomes somewhat systematic so if
you're going to be a sponge you have to
put yourself in a position to be a
sponge you have to know who to listen to
who to ignore how did you begin to
formulate that and
what does that process well look like
now well i knew how to make money and so
at 21 i sold vitamins i started building
homes building shopping centers
by the time i was 26 i built my first
hotel by the time i was 25 i told myself
i'll have my first jet at 35 and i did
so
i was an investor in a restaurant and
then when the world collapsed in the
late 80s
you couldn't develop anything in texas
for the next 10 years that's when every
snl failed like i said every bank failed
and i just started opening restaurants
and did that between like 86 and 92 and
then 93. i said well you know what i'll
just build restaurants because i
understand this business
since you can't develop anymore and i'll
take it public because that's when the
whole big thing of restaurant chains
going public did that for the next 17
years
and
then was an opportunist which i always
talk about
is that my stock crashed with everybody
else in 0.809 when i took it public i
owned 100 in 93 you wake up you're worth
100 million dollars i took it private in
09 and you're worth 500 million dollars
it was very successful bought it right
and then you know i could really grow
then because i didn't have the handcuffs
of being a public company and when you
think about the fundamentals of a
business when you're going in to
evaluate a deal or whatever
what like key things do you look for
well everything is uh
occupancy cost uh term of lease do they
own any real estate uh what are their
margins uh i'm not real smart but i know
how to do that okay i can analyze the
numbers of any business and tell you
what your margin should be or whatever
because my production cost is this i
have this many subscribers you should be
doing this or that and i don't care what
the business is so that's what i know
how to do
and so
if i try to make the right deal and i do
heavy due diligence and and then
hopefully you can
continue to grow your net worth
and if somebody wanted to get good at
what you're good at what would you
recommend they do you know i think you
know if you know business or not and
people ask me should i go get my mba and
you know what i usually tell them you
know if you need to go get your mba if
you don't have it inside of you and you
understand economics and finance and and
and operations of business then you need
to go get it i knew that i didn't need
it it was just a god-given gift but also
remember i didn't get a lot of those
other gifts don't ask me to play that
guitar don't ask me to sing you a song
and don't ask me to draw you anything
but but you've got to know your
god-given gifts and everybody has it
everybody in this room has it right here
so do what you know was your god-given
gift and find a way to use that as your
path
so when you think about um somebody
stepping into career and building
something obviously there's an element
of okay you need to figure out what
you're good at what you're not good at
do you believe that people can improve
the things that they're not good at
should they just entirely not think
about that and partner with people that
have a different skill set um you've
said do not partner with somebody that
has the same sales skills you read the
book you read the book
absolutely but at the same time
i've made myself you know understand uh
i.t information technology and if you
talk to any ceo of any company they'll
tell you that's the one department that
you do not want to uh because no matter
who you bring in everybody has their own
way of doing it and i've just still made
myself uh understand technology even
though i'm not a millennial i try to at
least know a little bit about every
single department even if i don't know
it a lot
and so walk me through you want to learn
about i.t what do you do you googling it
or do you go sit down with the head of
it and say teach me everything no i just
i i want to i want to know everything i
want to understand this you know you
know malware how people are are getting
into all of our systems and hackiness
and
and uh i just process for learning
though just sitting down and say you got
to make me smarter on this you got to
you got to help me through these steps
because i don't get it don't go into too
much minutia because you'll lose me
because i'm not that smart but you got
to give me the steps of why this is
happening or not happening and that's
something that everybody should do you
don't have to understand you know that
i'm going to go and be able to program
something or or write something but but
we should all if we're running a company
understand some portion of it uh when
i'm shooting billion dollar buyer i know
what all these different people do and
exactly what they're doing and how
important you know each person is and
and uh it's just trying to understand
what you do and it makes you appreciate
that person and how smart they are at
that job too and how important they are
to your company all right let's say i'm
one of your kids i want to
take over the business one day
what how are you going to help me absorb
the business fundamentals does it just
follow you around is it you're going to
hand me a list of tillman isms like what
does that process this this is this is a
really great question that you just
asked because i've had people say to me
why don't you let your kids work for me
for a while instead of just working for
you and then other people said you
should put them in one department and
let them learn that department and and
uh
and
you know what i've said and i really
think i'm doing it right and we'll see
only time will tell there's so many
departments you're talking about
a four billion dollar revenue company
with 60 000 employees and 700 million in
ebitda that does everything
from you know i have 25 biologists that
work for me at aquariums so everything
from aquariums to amusement parks to
five casinos to restaurants to
an nba basketball team okay just
everything you can think of
i'm teaching them
to make decisions
because that's really what it's all
about
is learn how to make decisions
see how
i make decisions every day about
everything whether it's a little
decision
or a big decision
and they've been doing that with me and
they they're pretty smart we don't know
that we could run this without you
so it's kind of interesting because it's
just it's them sitting in meetings and
seeing how i make decisions is the best
thing i can do for them instead of
learning one little department so if you
were going to teach us
a few key business principles what are
what are some of the core principles of
business that you
really like
if you knew
if i die without my kids understanding
these three to five things like what
would those three to five things be
know your numbers no matter what
business you're looking at always know
your numbers
number two realize that that
we're not successful if that consumer
does not
come to us whether they're eating in
your restaurants where they're playing
in your casino and and and whether if
you don't have a good product on that
basketball court the fans are not going
to come and buy those tickets the
sponsors aren't going to come and
therefore you're not going to have the
money to pay for those good players next
year you're not going to be able to pay
russell westbrook and james harden each
40 million dollars a year you've got to
always remember we're only as good as us
taking care of that consumer
one of the things i teach everybody and
especially my kids don't assume anything
i people think that somebody walks in
and gives you an answer that it's the
right answer and and and even when i
tell somebody to do something i don't
assume they went and did it all i asked
them a week later did you do that that i
asked you to do because that was really
important to me oh my gosh i didn't do
that and i think that's the biggest
mistake people make is don't assume that
everything's running right don't assume
anything
do you see parallels between the game
that you play in business and sports is
that why there is a passion for you on
both sides 100 percent
i operate by the 95 5 rule
95 of
of everything we do in business if we're
doing anything is right so look for the
five percent
uh soon find the five percent this is so
powerful
and
reading it in the book i was like okay
here we go so how do you
spot the five percent how do you know
what five percent matters how do you
prioritize how you attack that five
percent okay well let me just say this
okay i walked into this studio okay
and and i've done a lot of interviews
and and uh as soon as i walk in your
your people greet you they introduce you
know this you come up here here's uh
here's some snacks there's even a a a
camera light uh so if they're doing your
makeup up there it's a perfect lighting
i could tell this guy has his act
together this this guy i'm having a hard
time finding his
five percent because they're doing
everything right
and i'm not just saying that but you
know everything i'm saying is true that
you have somebody meet us outside we're
not working around lost
and and uh
so i hadn't found the five percent here
i'm sure before the show's over i will
but but
it's there for sure i think you're right
everybody but i judged you you and your
operation the second i walked in and
it's no different if i'm pulling up to a
retail store or a hotel or a restaurant
or whatever and before i get to the
front door i'm pulling up in that
parking lot is the parking lot in pretty
good shape are there weeds out there are
there cigarette butts in the parking lot
uh or their lights burn out uh the front
door's got a bunch of smudges on it i
haven't even walked in yet and i can
tell you this isn't a crisp operation
i can tell you everything how the
operation is going to be inside before i
ever walked in the front door because if
they're not taking care of the outside
the inside's not going to be good and
that's the same parallel that i used for
the basketball team we had a great year
again we won the most games we've ever
won in a two-year period in my first two
years of ownership but i sat down with
the general manager and and the head
coach and my top basketball people and
said all right we did 95 of everything
right but we didn't beat golden state
again so let's what do we need to do how
do we improve that five percent and we
kicked it around and and and that's when
we decided that maybe there's an
opportunity to be a little more athletic
and getting a great transition player uh
who can speed the game up and make us a
better team like a russell westbrook and
so that was the five percent we were
looking for
changing out a few coaching positions
changing out a few other players you're
never gonna be great if you don't look
for the five percent
yeah as you were talking i thought okay
i'm beginning to get a very clear
picture of what makes you work so
remember that i don't believe and it's
not that i don't believe that some
people come with sort of hardwired gifts
it's that i don't find it very helpful
so if you're if the sum total of your
story is that ah you're either born with
it or you're not why read the book right
so
it comes down to there is an element of
this stuff that can be taught and
hearing you talk the part that sounds so
interesting to me that i think can be
taught is you have really high
standards and
more importantly than that you have high
standards that when you look at where
it's going wrong it doesn't damage your
sense of self-esteem so you're willing
to look at it you're willing to what i
call staring nakedly at your
inadequacies you don't walk into a
restaurant to clap for yourself you walk
into a restaurant to figure out the
is going wrong not saying that it's bad
you're just saying that if we want to
and this is my favorite concept of yours
separate ourselves from everybody else
easiest thing to do it's the easiest
thing to do and i tell everybody that no
matter what your job is is that you can
go to work every day and separate
yourself from anybody else and it's no
different than the sound guy on this set
if you pick up you know what this sound
guy is really really good and he's
worried about this and he's worried
about that then all of a sudden you tell
somebody you need a good sound guy this
and then they end up on this person
because of a recommendation all of a
sudden this guy is known as the best
sound guy in la because he's paying
attention or she's paying attention to
details that the other sound people
don't no you know what i i i hear an
ambulance out there let's cut it you
know just a little little little bitty
things and i just think that it's easy
to separate yourself from anybody else
no matter what your position is if if
you go to work for a company and you
don't go up the corporate ladder it's
your fault it's nobody else's you're
either with the wrong company where
there's no upward mobility or you just
separate yourself because i know one
thing if you work for me i'm paying
attention
nothing goes unnoticed okay and i tell
people that all the time if you want to
separate yourself it's easy to do
because somebody above you is going to
notice it your peers are going to notice
it it is easy to separate yourself from
anybody else yeah that that notion to me
is one of the most critical things that
anybody in a company can do and i love
what you're saying about personal
responsibility it's on you man if you're
not
even if like you said it's just that
you're you're in the wrong company
you're in the wrong company and so if
you want to get somewhere where you can
move you either have to go somewhere
else or get your skill set aligned if
somebody comes to you and is like i want
to improve
i get that it is specific to that case
but are there general things that
somebody can do is there
is it start with shut up and listen is
it the tillmanisms is it getting those
things ingrained in your soul or is
there something else that gives somebody
the the mental framework with which to
propel themselves forward you know i
think that you can pick up from from
talking to me
that that i'm not on a different level
okay these are pretty simple basic tools
and so nobody out there is listening to
him and saying god dorn he's just he's
just using words and he's just so much
smarter than me so i'm not going to
become worth five billion dollars that
book is okay he's just
naturally smarter than me
i think you can see that i'm no smarter
than anybody else in this room
i just use certain little basic tools to
be successful every day take the word no
out of your vocabulary worry about your
customer no spare customers use the 95 5
rule separate yourself
from everybody else be the bull at
whatever you do and on and on and on
know what you're good at know what
you're not good at i want to go back to
the bull thing so
um
certainly i understand it when it comes
down to an acquisition being bullish
basically when there's blood in the
street that's when there's real
opportunity like i get all of that um
now give it to me like i'm a young kid
i'm trying to come up through the mail
room whatever like how does one embody
the bull is it about confidence is it
about
audaciousness like what is that thing
um whatever position you're at
you want to be the bull and i don't care
if you're in the mail room or if you're
the person behind that camera that i'm
going to be better than anybody else
with that camera and i'm going to be the
best male
uh carrier and the person who comes up
and is the most organized and does it
the most professional way you can be the
bull at any position you're doing and
it's just telling yourself i'm going to
do this better than anybody else
i don't care what the job is
i don't care what you do
you be the bull at what you do
what drives you is it setting goals is
it the conquest is it
you know somebody that that's an
all-weather winner there's something
pushing them now it's a sport it's just
the sport of this is what i do every day
and people say why why do you do this
and i just said because what would i do
i mean if i can't come to the office and
solve problems and fight with everybody
and and conquest some and you know
conquer then then what am i going to do
with myself i'm going to sit home and
die i mean that's what i enjoy doing
this is my basketball this is my game
that i play this is my pickup uh
monopoly game whatever you want to call
it okay this is i love going to the
office
and and and leading people and and
trying to conquer something that's what
i enjoy doing it's sport so when you
were
it's so interesting because you once
said that you know when i had my first
restaurant and i was finally being
successful and i think you were making
like three or four million dollars a
year and your dad was like why do you
keep putting this all at risk
and
you said that's basically how i think of
myself now like you may think that i've
gotten big but to me this is like
nothing compared to where i want to go
how do you dream big and how concrete
are those dreams like do you maybe
you're not willing to say out loud but
do you already know like this is my next
acquisition and this is where i'm headed
and this is how i get the nfl team and
totally that's you're exactly right this
is this is steps to get to the next
level
now if i don't pull any of that off have
i reached that point in life where i'm
happy yeah i don't feel like after i
bought the houston rockets
uh and once again i you know who gets to
own 100 of their team in their hometown
there's probably nine of all the major
100 sports teams there's probably not
five so i feel very fortunate
so if nothing else is accomplished do i
feel pretty good i feel okay i really do
i really do and i thank the you know the
good lord and
and all the people that helped me
accomplish it
but but what you just said is happening
i'm taking the next steps right now to
get to the next level
because always that's my sport let's go
play pick up basketball let's go to the
office and play business and that's what
i do every day i go to the office and
play business i have weekends if i'm not
on vacation or on the boat somewhere or
whatever and i'm sitting at home and
it's labor day or memorial day and i
don't have plans i'm going nuts i'm
gonna go to the office
i want to attack
if people want to engage with you they
want to learn more about what you're
doing where would they find you
you know
follow me on instagram or facebook or
twitter and
read shut up and listen and and all the
people that work for me will tell you
that have read the book that is tillman
talking that is that is him it it
it would capture him perfectly and like
i said i've never been the smartest guy
in the room never professed to be but i
will out thank you i'll i will outwork
you i will out motivate you and and i
will teach you how to lead
really fast talk to me about the notion
of outworking people
uh i can tell you we've worn down many
of people on deals when we just say
let's just keep going the greatest time
to negotiate a deal is friday and
thinking that
everybody's going to leave at five or
six o'clock in the evening
and so i always try to set up a
negotiation for all you people that i
plan on doing an acquisition from in the
future
because we'll go right through the
weekend and they want to go home and so
we just keep plowing through at three in
the morning four in the morning
we will outwork your ass yeah one of the
greatest strategies in life in my
opinion i'm totally with you on that one
what is the impact you want to have on
the world
you always want to do the right thing
you want to be remembered that you you
were very successful but you did it
fairly and squarely uh all out you know
i will i have take pride in out
negotiating your ass okay
uh
and and you just want to leave this
world that everybody said god that was a
difficult son of a gun but he always did
the right thing
that's pretty good
all right guys the tillman isms alone
are worth the price of admission i
highly recommend the book it is a lot of
fun
if you were paying attention the way
he's talking you will definitely when
you read the book realize that that is
definitely his voice and captures his
spirit and somebody that can start
with a single restaurant and build what
he's built today if you have any
interest in doing something
extraordinary in your life regardless by
the way of whether you want to be an
entrepreneur or not i think a lot of the
rules apply to just knowing more about
something outworking people knowing what
you want big audacious goals all of that
stuff being the bull it will pay off
well in your life if you haven't already
be sure to subscribe and until next time
my friends be legendary take care
gentlemen thank you my friend
that was wonderful man
and i learned this selling encyclopedias
door-to-door early 20s
is be prepared in life for a lot of
rejection because if you're prepared for
a lot of rejection that comes you don't
get turned off you don't get
disappointed like well i'm not gonna do
this anymore no one thinks it's a good
idea